---
layout: post
title:  Race the Beam Ray Tracer"
date:   2018-11-11 14:00:00 -0700
categories: RTL
---

# Introduction

Ray-tracing has always been one of the best rendering techniques. It's often used in large scale render farms to create the images
of movies. But it's also very calculation intensive, and those movie images can take many hours per frame to complete.

Nobody ever considered using ray tracing as the primary way of rendering graphics in an FPGA, and definitely not in a 10 year 
old Spartan 3E!

Well, that ends today, with the release of the first true Zero Latency Race the Beam Ray Tracer (RtBRT)!

RtBRT has a bunch of very appealing and unique features:

* Zero Latency Race the Beam Rendering 

    Pioneered by the Atari 2600, RtBRT has zero latency rendering: the value of each pixel is calculated at the exact point
    where it's needed.

* Frame Buffer Free

    Since pixel value are calculated on the fly, no large and costly memory buffers are needed to temporarily store an image.

* Direct Math Architecture 

    The RtBRT hardware contains all the math operations that are necessary for your scene and not one math operation more. 

* Zero Geometry Buffer

    Even more revolutionary than the lack of frame buffer is the total lack of memory required for geometry. Thanks to the
    not-quite-patented 

* Driver Free Plug and Play!

    Drivers are a huge source of bugs and instability in today's computers. The best way to avoid these issues is to do away 
    with them altogether! Thanks to RtBRT, drivers are something of the past. It gets even better: not only do you not need a
    driver, you don't even need a CPU! It's amazing.


