---
layout: post
title: Freecad
date:   2019-10-01 10:00:00 -0700
categories:
---

# View Fit

In most workbenches, you can use View->Standard Views->Fit All (shortcut V,F) to display all visible objects
of your design. I use it all the time, and it works as expected... except when the grid is on. In the
case, it will fit both your design objects *and* the grid. This makes no sense whatsoever, but according
to [this](https://forum.freecadweb.org/viewtopic.php?t=12050) forum thread, it seems to be a limitation
of the underlying libraries.

With View Fit a common operation, you'd expect it to work everywhere. But
that's not the case: in the Sketcher, the V is a shortcut for 'Constrain Vertical'. The 'Fit All' menu
option still exists, and works when you select it with the mouse. It even still lists 'V,F' as shortcut, 
but the Constrain Vertical shortcut apparently overrides that, so you're stuck with zooming in and
out using 'Box Zoom' instead. 

Maddening.

# Measuring things

One of the issues I ran in to was simply measuring things between features of different objects
on different planes.

The problem is that there are different ways of doing so and the right one (for me) has the most non-standard
icon and it's only located in one workbench.

Method 1: the Measure distance function.

This is available across all workbenches and has the most intuitive name and icon. It's also useless
in many cases, because it only has a very limited set of snapping (no options), and only measures absolute
distance without breaking things out along axes. 

When you read the [online manual](https://www.freecadweb.org/wiki/Std_MeasureDistance#Limitations) closely, 
this is all spelled out nicely, but who would read the manual for something as simple as measuring
something?

It also adds the measured distance as an object in your design, which could be useful when you want to 
annotate a drawing with dimensions, but it's not something I'd do by default. 

Method 2: The Draft Dimensions Tool

This method has all the powerful Draft workbench snapping options. It's the tool of choice when you
want to annotate your design with dimensions that (potentially) update when you modify the underlying object.

Like the measure distance function, it adds an object to your design, and you need to be explicit in what
you want to get the right distance.

Still not good option if you just want to measure something...

Method 3: The Measure Linear and Measure Angular tools

Available in the Part workbench, this one is perfect for quick and dirty measurements. It will leave
the measurements on the page for as long as you want, without them becoming a key part of your design.
It provides distances along all axes as well as absolute distance. And it has sensible snapping options.

This should be default that's available across all benches, but sadly it's not.

# Attaching a Sketch to a Cube

You can create a cube in the Part workbench, but then you can't attach a sketch to it.

For that, you need to create a body in the Part Design bench, which is also a cube, and then you
attach a sketch to it.

# Part Design bench has Create Body and Create Part

Most (all?) of the sketch related functions work on a Body object. And you can create one of those
in the Part Design bench. But there is also an identically shaped (with different color) icon
that creates a part instead of a body.

Why?


# When to use a Compound and when to Fuse things?



