---
layout: post
title: Sony CHM-9001-00 CRT
date:  2022-01-29 00:00:00 -1000
categories:
---

* TOC
{:toc}

XXX Insert danger warning XXX

# Introduction

I recently become the proud owner of an HP 16500A logic analyzer for the 
low low price of $20. It's a mainframe design, with a 6 slot backplane that contains
a CPU system that's based on a Motorola 68000, and 5 additional slots for various
plug-in measurement units. In my case, it came with an 80 channel 25MHz/100MHz 
digital acquisition card with a 4K acquisition depth, but higher performance cards 
exist. The display is a a 9" color CRT.

The logic analyzer functionality itself is not particularly useful for me: 
I never need that many channels, it's a huge beast the impractical to move around,
the acquisition depth is pathetic, the maximum sample rate is too low, 
and it's not trivial to get data of the machine for later analysis (you need either 
a non-standard floppy or you need a GPIB interface).

But it's fun to take a vintage piece of electronics is always fun just for the sake
of it, and after doing that, I found out that the CRT is a Sony CHM-9001-00 with
a Trinitron tube, a self-contained unit that can relatively easily be removed
from the main chassis.

It made me wonder if there'd be some to use it in some creative ways?

In this blog post, I dive into some of the details of this CRT and try to
figure out how it interacts with the rest of the system.

# Safety

Before opening and working on a device like this, let’s first talk about safety: 

**WORKING ON SOMETHING LIKE THIS COULD KILL YOU.** 

There, I’ve said it. So, please, if you're not familiar with devices like this,
just read this blog for entertainment and don't try to reproduce my results.
If you decide to do it anyway, you do so at your risk, and please take a number of 
basic precautions:

* **Read the [HP 16500A][HP 16500A Service Manual] and the [Sony CHM-9001-00][CHM-9001 Service Manual] 
  service manuals.** They are authoritative, not the scrappy blog of some electronics hobbyist.
* **Unplug the AC power cable** before you start going at it with a screw driver.
* **Wait 5 minutes after unplugging the AC power cable**: the power supply unit of an HP 16500A 
  has a lot of large capacitors and doesn’t have bleeder resistors to help discharge 
  them after power is removed.
* **The front ON/OFF switch is not a power switch.** It merely puts the device in a
  standby low(er) power state.
* **The HP 16500A power supply unit creates 120V DC to power the CRT module**. Most power supply 
  units only create relatively low DC voltages, this one does not. Be extra careful.
* **CRT tubes require voltages that can go above a 1000V**. I’m not totally sure 
  about this one, but the CRT schematic has annotation of 800V. 
* **Be extra careful about dropping screws.** There are a lot of them. If one drops, get it 
  out before moving on to the next one. You don't want specialty fireworks due to a screw
  induced short circuit!
* If you want to switch on the device while the covers are removed, **tape some 
  cardboard on top of the CRT unit** to prevent accidentally touching the high voltage parts.
* **Never EVER do any measurements inside the bowels of the CRT module** when it’s powered on. 
  Sony provided a lot of measurement test points on the outside PCBs. There is absolutely 
  no need to get inside.
* **Have a clean workspace.** My bench is usually a horrible mess, but I unclutter it for 
  projects like this.

# Opening up the Logic Analyzer

# A First Look at the CRT 

* Information from the HP service manual
    * Section 4-5: Color Display Module Adjustment
 	Includes white balance with RV901 and RV902.
    * Page 6-3 System Overview Theory
        120V supply is only used by the color module.
   	CPU board block diagram
    * Page 6-34: Video Signals Check
	Contains connector pinout.
* How the CRT is driven by the logic analyzer
    * CPU board Block diagram 
    * Chips on the CPU board
    * Voltage levels
    * Connector
* CRT PCBs
* CRT resolution: 576x368
    * Aspect ratio: roughly 14:9
    * old school games (donkey kong, pacman etc): 256x224, 8:7 aspect ratio

# The Sony CHM-9001-00 Service Manual


# References

* [HP 16500A/16501A Service Manual][HP 16500A Service Manual]
* [Sony CHM-9001 Service Manual](/assets/hp16500a/sony-chm-9001-00-service-manual.pdf)

[HP 16500A Service Manual]: /assets/hp16500a/HP16500-90911-Service-Manual.pdf
[CHM-9001 Service Manual]: /assets/hp16500a/sony-chm-9001-00-service-manual.pdf

# Footnote

Blah Blah[^1]

[^1]: This is a footnote...


