---
layout: post
title: GM1213 Thermometer Review and Teardown
date:   2023-02-10 00:00:00 -0700
categories:
---

* TOC
{:toc}

# Introduction

I've been doing a bunch of measurements on oven-controlled oscillators lately, 
including their temperature. There are multiple ways to measure temperature
electronically, but the most popular one is to use a thermocouple.

Simplified to its most basic form, a thermocouple is a device that converts the 
temperature *difference* between the end points of a wire into a voltage.

Thermocouples are based on the 
[Seebeck effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermoelectric_effect): when
2 different electrically conductive materials are made in contact with eachother 
(the 'hot side'), then a voltage will be generated at the other side of the two metals 
(the 'cold side'). This voltage is proportional to the difference in temperature between 
the hot side and the cold side.

You can buy thermocouples in all kinds of forms on Amazon. The simplest ones look like
this:


It's exactly as described: 2 wires, a blob of solder on one side, and 2 contact on the
other.

There are 8 standard combinations of thermocouple materials that are specified
by a letter: B-type, E-type, J-type, K-type, N-type, R-type, S-type and J-type.
Each type has a different temperature range, generates different voltages, and has
different material properties wrt oxidation etc. By far the most common
thermocouple type is the K-type, which uses the 
[alumel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alumel) and [chromel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chromel)
alloys as the 2 materials.

The voltages generated by thermocouples are pretty small. K-type thermocouples
generate a voltage of -6.4mV at -270C and 54.9mV at 1260C, or 41uV/C. That last
number is the [Seebeck coefficient](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seebeck_coefficient).
The temperature difference between, say, room temperature and a pot of boiling water, will 
manifest itself as a voltage difference of just 3mV.

The Seebeck coefficient for some thermocouple types is even smaller. The coefficient
itself can also be temperature dependent (though it's pretty constant for a K-type.)

So use a thermocouple, you need a voltmeter with a precision in the micro Volt range,
and a formula or table lookup to correct for the coefficient not being constant.

And since a thermocouple can only measure a temperature difference, you also need
another way to measure the ambient temperature inside the voltmeter to calculate
the absolute temperature.




* [Type K Thermocouple (Chromel / Alumel)200째C to +1260째C / -328째F to +2300째F](https://www.thermometricscorp.com/thertypk.html)
* [Thermocouples: Function, Types, Selection and Application](https://blog.endaq.com/thermocouples-function-types-selection-and-application)
